training/README.md, before:

# Anticipatory Action Python set-up


### Table of contents

* [1. Clone the repository from GitHub](#chapter1)
* [2. Create an environment with Anaconda](#chapter2)
* [3. Download the data](#chapter3)
* [4. Run the Anticipatory Action workflow](#chapter4)


## 1. Clone the repository from GitHub <a class="anchor" id="chapter1"></a>

*To complete prior to the training:*

Start by installing **GitHub desktop** on your machine using this [link](https://desktop.github.com/).

Then open GitHub desktop and follow this [tutorial](https://docs.github.com/en/desktop/overview/getting-started-with-github-desktop#part-1-installing-and-authenticating) to authenticate. This requires having a GitHub account, so please create an account if you don't have one yet. 

Once this is done, you can follow these steps [here](https://data.earthobservation.vam.wfp.org/public-share/aa/2022_moz.zip) to clone the [anticipatory action repository](https://github.com/WFP-VAM/anticipatory-action/).


## 2. Create an environment with Anaconda <a class="anchor" id="chapter2"></a>

*To complete prior to the training:*

You need to install the required Python libraries in an environment to run this package. To do this, we will use Anaconda, which can be downloaded freely [here](https://www.anaconda.com/download/success).

*This will be done during the training:*

Once you have it installed, open the **Anaconda PowerShell** prompt and use `cd` (change directory) and `ls` (list files and directories) commands to go to the folder where you have downloaded the **aa-env** repository.

For example, run the following command if the anticipatory-action repo has been cloned in the Documents folder: 

`cd Documents/anticipatory-action` (to be adapted)

Once you are in the anticipatory-action folder and are able to see the `aa-env.yml` file when doing `ls`, please create a new environment named `aa-env` that will contain all the required packages:

`conda env create -f aa-env.yml`

Now, activate the environment:

`conda activate aa-env`

To confirm that you have successfully activated the environment, your command line prompt should begin with *aa-env*.

Make sure it is active before running any workflow.


## 3. Download the data <a class="anchor" id="chapter3"></a>

*To do prior to the training:*

Please start downloading the data from [that link](https://data.earthobservation.vam.wfp.org/public-share/aa/mozambique/moz.zip) and save it within the **data** folder of the *anticipatory-action* repo. You may not have the data folder in your filesystem if you just cloned the github repository, in that case please create it within the anticipatory-action folder. 

Once that is done, make sure you have the following structure within your filesystem:

``` 
anticipatory-action
├── data
│   ├── iso
│   │   ├── auc
│   │   │   ├── split_by_issue
│   │   ├── probs
│   │   ├── triggers
│   │   ├── zarr
│   │   │   ├── 2022
│   │   │   │   ├── 01
│   │   │   │   ├── 02
│   │   │   │   ├── 05
│   │   │   │   ├── 06
│   │   │   │   ├── 07
│   │   │   │   ├── 08
│   │   │   │   ├── 09
│   │   │   │   ├── 10
│   │   │   │   ├── 11
│   │   │   │   ├── 12
│   │   │   │   ├── obs
```


## 4. Run the Anticipatory Action workflow

*This will be done during the training:*

The training contains two main scripts:

* `run-full-verification.py` contains the verification step with the computation of the roc scores and the triggers step with the selection of the optimal triggers. This one should be run only once, and in general before the beginning of the monitoring. 

* `run-operational-monitoring.py` contains the operational steps needed to process the forecasts received each month. This should be run each month to derive the probabilities, and these probabilities are then merged with the triggers to check the alerts. 

If you want to work on these notebooks, please open the **Anaconda PowerShell** prompt and run the following commands:

`cd <path_to_AA_folder>` 

`conda activate aa-env`

`jupyter lab`

Once the jupyter lab window is open, please click-right on the notebook you want to open, select *Open with* > *Jupyter Notebook*. 

Before getting your hands dirty, a few tips about jupyter lab:

* press `+` to add a cell of code or press "a" (above) or "b" (below) once a cell is selected
* if you want to add text, first add a cell and then click on the "Code" drop-down menu to select "Markdown"
* delete a cell by clicking on the scissors icon or the bin when you select it
* run a cell by clicking on the player icon or by pressing "Shift-Enter" / "Ctrl-Enter"
* open a terminal / a new file by clicking on the blue '+' at the top-left of the window
* each time you update code in an external file, you need to restart the kernel using the loop icon
* each time you restart the kernel, you need to rerun each cell of your notebook

Commit message:

Update training materials with latest pixi and path changes (#53)
* update training README

* wrap triggers file read in dedicated func

* update operational training nb with latest path / pixi changes

* update verification training nb with latest path / pixi changes

* clear output cells

* lint

training/README.md, after:

# Anticipatory Action Python set-up


### Table of contents

* [1. Clone the repository from GitHub](#chapter1)
* [2. Create an environment with Anaconda](#chapter2)
* [3. Download the data](#chapter3)
* [4. Run the Anticipatory Action workflow](#chapter4)


## 1. Clone the repository from GitHub <a class="anchor" id="chapter1"></a>

*To complete prior to the training:*

Start by installing **GitHub desktop** on your machine using this [link](https://desktop.github.com/).

Then open GitHub desktop and follow this [tutorial](https://docs.github.com/en/desktop/overview/getting-started-with-github-desktop#part-1-installing-and-authenticating) to authenticate. This requires having a GitHub account, so please create an account if you don't have one yet. 

Once this is done, you can follow these steps [here](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/creating-and-managing-repositories/cloning-a-repository?tool=desktop#cloning-a-repository) to clone the [anticipatory action repository](https://github.com/WFP-VAM/anticipatory-action/).


## 2. Create a *pixi* environment <a class="anchor" id="chapter2"></a>

*To complete prior to the training:*

You need to install [pixi](https://pixi.sh/latest/) to manage the `anticipatory-action` package. To do this, you can follow the instructions [here](https://pixi.sh/latest/installation/). Instructions are available for both Windows and MacOS.

*This will be done during the training:*

Once you have it installed, open the **Windows PowerShell** prompt and use `cd` (change directory) and `dir` (list files and directories) commands to go to the folder where you have downloaded the **anticipatory-action** GitHub repository. The default location should be `C:/Users/<username>/Documents/GitHub/anticipatory-action`.

For example, run the following command if the anticipatory-action repo has been cloned in the Documents folder: 

`cd Documents/anticipatory-action` (to be adapted)

Once you are in the anticipatory-action folder, please install the environment that will contain all the required packages:

`pixi install --locked`

You can test if the environment installation worked well by trying to open Jupyter Lab:

`pixi run jupyter lab`


## 3. Download the data <a class="anchor" id="chapter3"></a>

*To do prior to the training:*

Please start downloading the data from the link shared by email and save it within the **data** folder of the *anticipatory-action* repo. You may not have the data folder in your filesystem if you just cloned the github repository, in that case please create it within the anticipatory-action folder. 

Once that is done, make sure you have the following structure within your filesystem:

``` 
anticipatory-action
├── data
│   ├── iso
│   │   ├── auc
│   │   │   ├── split_by_issue
│   │   ├── probs
│   │   ├── triggers
│   │   ├── zarr
│   │   │   ├── 2022
│   │   │   │   ├── 01
│   │   │   │   ├── 02
│   │   │   │   ├── 05
│   │   │   │   ├── 06
│   │   │   │   ├── 07
│   │   │   │   ├── 08
│   │   │   │   ├── 09
│   │   │   │   ├── 10
│   │   │   │   ├── 11
│   │   │   │   ├── 12
│   │   │   │   ├── obs
```


## 4. Run the Anticipatory Action workflow

*This will be done during the training:*

The training contains two main scripts:

* `run-full-verification.py` contains the verification step with the computation of the roc scores and the triggers step with the selection of the optimal triggers. This one should be run only once, and in general before the beginning of the monitoring. 

* `run-operational-monitoring.py` contains the operational steps needed to process the forecasts received each month. This should be run each month to derive the probabilities, and these probabilities are then merged with the triggers to check the alerts. 

If you want to work on these notebooks, please open the **Windows PowerShell** prompt and run the following commands:

`cd <path_to_AA_folder>` 

`pixi run jupyter lab`

Once the jupyter lab window is open, please click-right on the notebook you want to open, select *Open with* > *Jupyter Notebook*. 

Before getting your hands dirty, a few tips about jupyter lab:

* press `+` to add a cell of code or press "a" (above) or "b" (below) once a cell is selected
* if you want to add text, first add a cell and then click on the "Code" drop-down menu to select "Markdown"
* delete a cell by clicking on the scissors icon or the bin when you select it
* run a cell by clicking on the player icon or by pressing "Shift-Enter" / "Ctrl-Enter"
* open a terminal / a new file by clicking on the blue '+' at the top-left of the window
* each time you update code in an external file, you need to restart the kernel using the loop icon
* each time you restart the kernel, you need to rerun each cell of your notebook
